# Patient level factors associated with delayed treatment in adult trauma patients

This repository documents our research project on patient level
factors associated with delayed treatment in adult trauma patients.

## Summary

### Introduction

Trauma, the clinical entity composed of physical injury and the bodyâ€™s
associated response, is a leading cause of mortality and morbidity
worldwide. A cornerstone of trauma quality improvement programs is
multidisciplinary mortality and morbidity review to identify
opportunities for improvement and implement corrective
actions. Examples of opportunities for improvement may include lack of
resources and management errors. One common opportunity for
improvement is delayed treatment, with potentially adverse
effects. The patient level factors that may contribute to delayed
treatment in adult trauma patients are poorly understood.

### Aim

To determine how patient level factors are associated with delayed
treatment in adult trauma patients.

### Methods

This is a registry based cohort study using data from the trauma
registry and trauma care quality database at the Karolinska University
Hospital in Solna. The trauma registry includes about 12000 patients
treated between 2012 and 2022. The trauma care quality database is a
subset of the trauma registry and includes about 6000 patients
selected for review between 2014 and 2022. The outcome is delayed
treatment, as identified by the multidisciplinary review board and
recorded in the trauma care quality database. This project will link
the two databases and assess how different patient level factors, such
as age, sex, mechanism of injury, and injury severity, are associated
with delayed treatment using logistic regression. A 5% significance
level and 95% confidence levels will be used.

